\chapter{Introduction}
\label{chap:introduction}

\epigraph{
  Race de Ca√Øn, au ciel monte,\\
  Et sur la terre jette Dieu !
}{---\textcite[16]{baudelaire-1857}}

Category theory is a branch of mathematics developed in the 1940s
which has come to occupy a central position in computer science.
Broadly, it is a convenient and powerful conceptual framework or
language of structures and systems of structures
\parencites[vii]{maclane-1998}[1]{marquis-2013}[1154]{wolfram-2002}.

In computer science, category theory contributes to areas such as
automata theory, domain theory, functional programming, monads or
notions of computation, polymorphism, semantics, type theory, among
others
\parencites[23]{marquis-2013}{nlab-category-theory}[xi]{pierce-1991}[415]{poigne-1992}.

In computer science, category theory allows us to formulate
definitions and theories and to measure the elegance and coherence of
existing formulations, to carry out proofs, to discover and exploit
relations with other fields, to deal with abstraction and
representation independence, to formulate conjectures and research
directions, and to unify concepts \parencites[49--50]{goguen-1991}. In
addition, category theory is a foundational theory of functions which
provides a sound basis for functional programming
\parencite[414]{poigne-1992}.

``Category theory can be viewed as a formalization of operations on
abstract data types in computer languages''
\parencite[1154]{wolfram-2002}.






In functional programming,

``Most structures in mathematics are best understood from a category
theoretic viewpoint'' \parencite{nlab-category-theory}.

``Several concepts in Haskell are inspired or taken from category
theory. The most notable example being monads. When these concepts are
taken from category theory, however, very little of the theory around
them is brought along. This is why, despite claims to the contrary,
one can be a perfectly competent programmer without knowing anything
at all about category theory. But, if you are familiar with category
theory, you can turn around and apply it to Haskell''
\parencite[73]{elkins-2009}. ``The goal here is not to provide
intuition about monads, but instead to provide tools for analyzing and
building them and related structures. One could even say that the goal
is how you could arrive at these monads without intuition''
\parencite[73]{elkins-2009}.

Some functional programming languages (such as Haskell) have certain
important concepts for relating category theory to programming. In
this sense, polymorphism, algebraic data types, and the functor and
monad type classes, etc., are concepts which can be conceptualized or
are based on ideas from category theory. Even if its categorical
conceptualization is not necessary for its use, it's an ideal
complement for better understanding functional programming and its
theoretical foundations. (Haskell community)

Polymorphism refers to the fact that the type of a value may depend on
the context in which it is used. Algebraic data types have various
alternatives or constructors of values. Type classes allow to define
generic interfaces which exhibit characteristics common to a great
variety of types. Finally, a functor (in Haskell) is a class of types
which can be mapped and a monad (of Haskell) is a class of types which
introduces the concepts of context and the use of normal functions
which preserve the contexts of those contexts. (Real World Haskell).

The study of category theory will allow to understand and apply
effectively and efficiently the theoretical foundations of functional
programming. Category theory is a solid framework for a lot of
concepts of functional programming.

Even though the study of theoretical foundations of functional
programming is not strictly necessary for a programmer, it is an ideal
complement for his appropriate education and adequate understanding of
the theoretical and practical concepts of programming.

Even though the categorical formulation of some concepts may be
difficult to understand, category theory is a conceptual framework
which allows to deal with such concepts at a higher level of
abstraction.

``Some of the required functional constructions may be given natural
definitions within category theory'' \parencite[7]{pitt-1986}.






In summary, we study some concepts of functional programming through
category theory.






``Category-theoretic formulations of concepts can be more difficult to
grasp than their counterparts in other formalisms''
\parencite[xi]{pierce-1991}. ``One does not so much learn category
theory as absorb it over a period of time''
\parencite[25]{bird-demoor-1997}. ``From [116]: 'do not succumb to a
feeling that you must understand \emph{all} of category theory before
you put it to use'`` \parencite[xi]{pierce-1991}. ``Category theory
has been called 'abstract nonsense' by both its friends and its
detractors. Perhaps what this phrase suggests to both is that category
theory has relatively more form than content, compared to other areas
of mathematics'' \parencite[50]{goguen-1991}.

``Category theory can also be abused, and in several different styles.
One style of abuse is specious generality, in which some theory or
example is generalised in a way that does not actually include any new
examples of genuine interest. A related style of abuse is categorical
overkill, in which the language of category theory is used to describe
phenomena that do not actually require such an elaborate treatment or
terminology'' \parencite[50]{goguen-1991}.

``The trinity of concepts category, functor, and natural
transformation is what category theory is built on''
\parencite{nlab-category-theory}.

Category theory allows ``us to see the universal components of a
family of structures of a given kind, and how structures of different
kinds are interrelated'' \parencite[1]{marquis-2013}.

With category theory, ``concepts may be dealt with at a higher level''
\parencite[xi]{pierce-1991}.

``Category theory formalizes otherwise vague concepts''
\parencite[414]{poigne-1992}.

``Category theory provides a number of broadly useful, and yet
surprisingly specific, guidelines for organising, generalising, and
discovering analogies among and within various branches of mathematics
and its applications. I wish to suggest that the existence of such
guidelines can be seen to support an alternative, more pragmatic view:
Foundations should provide general concepts and tools that reveal the
structures and interrelations of various areas of mathematics and its
applications, and that help in doing and using mathematics''
\parencite[64]{goguen-1991}. ``In a field which is not yet very well
developed, such as computing science, where it often seems that
getting the definitions right is the hardest task, foundations in this
sense can be very useful, because they can suggest which research
directions may be fruitful, using relatively explicit measures of
elegance and coherence. The succesful use of category theory for such
purposes suggests that it provides at least the beginnings of such a
foundation'' \parencite[64]{goguen-1991}.

\section*{Summary of the project}
\label{sec:introduction-summary}

This is an undergraduate project submitted in partial fulfillment of
the requirements for the degree of Systems Engineering at EAFIT
University\footnote{\url{http://www.eafit.edu.co}}.


Having this into account (that it is possible to conceptualize many
concepts of functional programming via the study of category theory,
this project aims to develop a monographical study of category theory
which allows to describe and explain some of the applications to
functional programming. In particlar, ...

Our goal (objective) is to describe and explain some of the
applications of category theory to functional programming. More
specifically, to describe and explain the concepts of category theory
which allow us to conceptualize and better understand the following
concepts of functional programming: polymorphism, algebraic data
types, and the functor and monad type classes.

The product or result of this project is a monograph on category
theory and some of its applications to functional programming. This
monograph contains the results of the development of the project, that
is, the results of the writing stage.

\section*{Audience and prerequisites}
\label{sec:introduction-prerequisites}

We assume a working knowledge of functional programming in Haskell and
Agda. See the references on page
\pageref{sec:introduction-references}.

%% If any further background material is needed, it can be found in
%% textbooks on

The main audience of this project is any computer scientist with an
interest in mathematics, the theoretical foundations of computer
science or functional programming.

%% This book is addressed primarily to the mathematically inclined
%% functional programmer, though the non-functional -- but still
%% mathematically inclined -- programmer is not excluded. Although we
%% have taken pains to make the book as self-contained as possible, and
%% have provided lots of exercises for self-study, the reader will need
%% some mathematical background to appreciate and master the more
%% abstract material.

%% This project is written for mathematically inclined functional programmers.

%% The reader of this project is a mathematically inclined

%% We assume a working knowledge of functional programming in Haskell and
%% Agda.

%% The bibliographical remarks at the end of each chapter describe where
%% appropriate background material can be found.

%% The intended readership for this material is computer scientists with
%% some mathematical background with or without a background in category
%% theory.

fair amount of mathematical sophistication.

\section*{Overview of the project}
\label{sec:introduction-overview}

This project is divided into six chapters organized like the tree
diagram in Figure \ref{fig:overview}:
\begin{itemize}
\item
  In Chapter \ref{chap:categories} (\nameref{chap:categories}), we
  define categories and commutative diagrams, and the categories which
  will allow us to relate category theory to functional programming in
  Haskell and Agda.

\item
  In Chapter \ref{chap:constructions} (\nameref{chap:constructions}),
  we describe some basic constructions in categories (isomorphisms,
  initial and terminal objects, and products and coproducts), which we
  use for describing some concepts and examples in all subsequent
  chapters.

\item
  In Chapter \ref{chap:functors} (\nameref{chap:functors}), we study
  functors and endofunctors in order to conceptualize and better
  understand functors in Haskell and Agda.

\item
  In Chapter \ref{chap:naturals} (\nameref{chap:naturals}), we explore
  the connection between natural transformations and polymorphic
  functions in Haskell.

\item
  In Chapter \ref{chap:monads} (\nameref{chap:monads}), we give a
  detailed account of monads and Kleisli triples, and their
  correspondence to monads in Haskell and Agda.

\item
  In Chapter \ref{chap:algebras} (\nameref{chap:algebras}), we
  describe algebras and initial algebras over endofunctors, and their
  relation to algebraic data types in Haskell.

\item
  Finally, Chapter \ref{chap:conclusions} (\nameref{chap:conclusions})
  contains our conclusions and some ideas for future work.

\end{itemize}

Each chapter, except Chapter \ref{chap:constructions}, is further
subdivided into two or three sections concerning some concepts of
category theory, and their relation to functional programming in
Haskell and, in some cases, Agda. Additionally, each chapter ends with
a References section which collects the sources of information for all
definitions and examples.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzpicture}
      \node (categories)    at (2,8) {\nameref{chap:categories}};
      \node (constructions) at (2,6) {\nameref{chap:constructions}};
      \node (functors)      at (2,4) {\nameref{chap:functors}};
      \node (naturals)      at (0,2) {\nameref{chap:naturals}};
      \node (monads)        at (0,0) {\nameref{chap:monads}};
      \node (algebras)      at (4,2) {\nameref{chap:algebras}};

      \draw [->] (categories)    to (constructions);
      \draw [->] (constructions) to (functors);

      \draw [->] (functors)      to (naturals);
      \draw [->] (naturals)      to (monads);

      \draw [->] (functors)      to (algebras);
    \end{tikzpicture}
  \end{center}
  \caption{Overview of the project.}
  \label{fig:overview}
\end{figure}

\section*{References}
\label{sec:introduction-references}

\paragraph{Category theory}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Most of our definitions are based on \parencite{maclane-1998}, which
  is the standard reference on category theory.

\item
  \parencite{marquis-2013}, which includes: general definitions,
  examples, and applications; brief historical sketch; philosophical
  significance; and a programmatic reading guide. A useful
  programmatic reading guide can be found in
  \parencite[48--56]{marquis-2013}.

  It is an introductory and philosophical article regarding general
  category theory. Nice article for the preliminary study of category
  theory and contains an extended annotated bibliography.

\item
  The following book provides an accessible approach to category
  theory and categorical logic: \parencite{awodey-2010}

\item
  \parencites{eilenberg-maclane-1942}{eilenberg-maclane-1945}

\item
  \parencite{bird-demoor-1997} is a standard reference on the
  applications of category theory to computer science. Some parts of
  the book were used for the project proposal.

\item
  \parencite{pierce-1991} is an introductory reference for studying
  the applications of category theory to computer science. It is a
  summary of category theory and some of its applications, and
  contains a detailed bibliography.

  And \parencite[¬ß 4]{pierce-1991} contains books and articles for
  further reading.

\item
  \parencite{poigne-1992} is a reference for studying the applications
  of category theory to computer science. This book was the main
  reference for the project proposal.

\item
  Reprints in Theory and Applications of Categories
  \url{http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/} including
  \parencites{adamek-et-al-2006}{barr-wells-2005}{barr-wells-2012}

\end{itemize}

\paragraph{Haskell}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \parencites{lipovaca-2011}{osullivan-et-al-2008} or the
  HaskellWiki\footnote{\url{http://www.haskell.org/}}

  %%  Learn You a Haskell for Great Good! A Beginner's Guide

  %% RWH is an easy-to-use, fast-paced tutorial that introduces to
  %% Haskell.

\item
  \parencites{elkins-2009}{yorgey-2009}

  %% Typeclassopedia is a starting point for the student of Haskell
  %% wishing to gain a firm grasp of its standard type classes. The
  %% essentials of each type class are introduced, with examples,
  %% commentary, and extensive references for further reading.

  %% Elkins. Several concepts in Haskell are inspired by or taken from
  %% category theory. The most notable example being monads. tools for
  %% analyzing and building monads and related structures.

\end{itemize}

\paragraph{Agda} Sd

\begin{itemize}
\item
  The Agda wiki.\footnote{\url{http://wiki.portal.chalmers.se/agda/}}
  \parencite{norell-2007}

\item
  \parencites{bove-dybjer-2009}{norell-2009}

\end{itemize}

\paragraph{Sd}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \parencite{weisstein-mathworld}

\item
  $n$Lab

\end{itemize}

\section*{Notes}
\label{sec:introduction-notes}

\paragraph{Frontispiece}

The illustration in page \pageref{fig:hatter}, John Tenniel's
\emph{Hatter engaging in rhetoric}, is taken from the Tenniel
illustrations for Lewis Carroll's \emph{Alice's Adventures in
  Wonderland}\footnote{\url{http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/114}}.

\paragraph{Haskell and Agda code}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Haskell code was tested with GHC 7.6.3.

\item
  Agda code was tested with Agda 2.3.2.2 and the Agda standard library
  0.7. In addition, all Agda examples can be found in the repository
  \begin{center}
    \url{https://github.com/jpvillaisaza/abel}
  \end{center}


\end{itemize}

\paragraph{Links}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  This document is available for download at
  \url{http://bit.ly/1cq5fwN}.

\item
  A printable version is available at \url{http://bit.ly/1hDomqv}.

\end{itemize}
For more information, send an email to
\href{mailto:jvillai@eafit.edu.co}{\nolinkurl{jvillai@eafit.edu.co}}.

\clearemptydoublepage
