\chapter{Monads}
\label{chap:monads}

\epigraph{
  La Monade, dont nous parlerons icy, n'est autre chose qu'une
  substance simple...
}{---\textcite[1]{leibniz-1714}}

In this chapter we explore monads and Kleisli triples, and their
relation to monads in Haskell and Agda.

In Haskell, given two types \texthaskell{a} and \texthaskell{b}, the
Cartesian product\footnote{This definition is adapted from
  \parencite{weisstein-cartesian}.} of a list \texthaskell{xs} of
elements of type \texthaskell{a} and a list \texthaskell{ys} of
elements of type \texthaskell{b} is defined to be the list of tuples
\texthaskell{(x,y)} of type \texthaskell{(a,b)} for which
\texthaskell{x} belongs to \texthaskell{xs} and \texthaskell{y}
belongs to \texthaskell{ys}, that is, using a list comprehension:
\begin{codehaskell}
cartesian :: [a] -> [b] -> [(a,b)]
cartesian xs ys = [(x,y) | x <- xs, y <- ys]
\end{codehaskell}
or, equivalently, desugaring the list comprehension,
\begin{codehaskell}
cartesian xs ys = xs >>= \ x -> ys >>= \ y -> return (x,y)
\end{codehaskell}
which should be clarified by Examples \ref{ex:monad-list-haskell} and
\ref{ex:triple-list-haskell}. This is but one simple example to show
that ``a monad is often an obvious and useful tool to help solve a
problem'' \parencite[325]{osullivan-2008} and that ``many common
programming patterns have a monadic structure''
\parencite[328]{osullivan-2008}.

\todo{What follows is an idea for the introduction, but it is not
  ready.}

\todo{Remember to cite moggi-1989 to say that a computation is the
  denotation of a program and a notion of a computation is a
  qualitative description of a computation.}

In \parencite{moggi-1991}, category theory is taken as a general
theory of functions and develop on top a \emph{categorical semantics
  of computations} based on monads \parencite[56]{moggi-1991}.

The basic idea behind the categorical semantics below is that, in
order to interpret a programming language in a category \cat{C}, we
distinguish the object $a$ of values (of type $a$) from the object
$\funcO{T}(a)$ of computations (of type $a$), and take as denotations
of programs (of type $a$) the \emph{elements} of $\funcO{T}(a)$. In
particular, we identify the type $a$ with the object of values (of
type $a$) and obtain the object of computations (of type $a$) by
applying an unary type-constructor \funcO{T} to $a$. We call \funcO{T}
a \emph{notion of computation}, since it abstracts away from the type
of values computations may produce. There are many choices for
$\funcO{T}(a)$ corresponding to different notions of computations
\parencite[57--58]{moggi-1991}.

Rather than focusing on a specific \funcO{T}, we want to find the
general properties common to all notions of computation; therefore we
impose as the only requirement that \emph{programs} should form a
category. Such a requirement amounts to saying that \funcO{T} is part
of a Kleisli triple and that the category of programs is the Kleisli
category for such a triple \parencite[58]{moggi-1991}.

Kleisli triples are just an alternative description for monads.
Although the former are easy to justify from a computational
perspective, the latter are more widely used in the literature on
category theory and have the advantage of being defined only in terms
of functors and natural transformations, which make them more suitable
for abstract manipulation \parencite[60]{moggi-1991}.



In the remainder of this chapter, we define the concepts of monad and
Kleisli triple, we prove that monads and Kleisli triples are
equivalents, and we study both constructs in Haskell and Agda.

Examples of notions of computation: partiality, nondeterminism, side
effects, exceptions, continuations, interactive input, interactive
output. \parencite[58]{moggi-1991}.

\section{Monads and Kleisli triples}
\label{sec:monads}

In this section, we define the concepts of monad and Kleisli triple,
and prove their equivalence. Kleisli triples ``are easy to justify
from a computational perspective,'' but monads ``are more widely used
in (...) category theory and have the advantage of being defined only
in terms of functors and natural transformations, which make them more
suitable for abstract manipulation'' \parencite[60]{moggi-1991}.

\subsection*{Monads}

First, we describe monads.

\begin{definition}
  \label{def:monad}

  %% \parencite[137]{maclane-1998}

  Let $\cat{C}$ be a category. A monad $\mon{T} = (\func{T},
  \nat{\eta}, \nat{\mu})$ in \cat{C} consists of an endofunctor
  $\func{T}: \cat{C} \to \cat{C}$, together with two natural
  transformations
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-unit}
    \nat{\eta}: \func{I} \to \func{T}: \cat{C} \to \cat{C}
  \end{equation}
  and
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-multiplication}
    \nat{\mu}: \func{T \comp T} \to \func{T}: \cat{C} \to \cat{C}
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  called unit and multiplication of the monad, respectively, such
  that, for all objects $a$,
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-associativity}
    \natO{\mu}{a} \comp \natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(a)} = \natO{\mu}{a} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\mu}{a})
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-unity-left}
    \natO{\mu}{a} \comp \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  and
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-unity-right}
    \natO{\mu}{a} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\eta}{a}) = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  that is, the diagrams in Figures \ref{fig:monad-associativity} and
  \ref{fig:monad-unity}\footnote{We use double arrows in commutative
    diagrams to represent equality of objects.} are commutative. Since
  \nat{\eta} and \nat{\mu} are natural transformations, then, for all
  morphisms $f: a \to \funcO{T}(b)$,
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-naturality-unit}
    \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f = \funcM{T}(f) \comp \natO{\eta}{a}
  \end{equation}
  and
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-naturality-multiplication}
    \natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp \funcM{T}(\funcM{T}(f)) = \funcM{T}(f) \comp \natO{\mu}{a}
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  that is, the diagrams in Figures \ref{fig:monad-naturality-unit} and
  \ref{fig:monad-naturality-multiplication} are commutative.

  \begin{figure}[htb]
    \begin{center}
      \begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=4cm]
        \node (ttt a)                  {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a)))$};
        \node (tt a1) [right of=ttt a] {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a))$};
        \node (tt a2) [below of=ttt a] {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a))$};
        \node (t a)   [right of=tt a2] {$\funcO{T}(a)$};

        \draw [->] (ttt a) to node        {$\funcM{T}(\natO{\mu}{a})$} (tt a1);
        \draw [->] (ttt a) to node [swap] {$\natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(a)}$} (tt a2);
        \draw [->] (tt a1) to node        {$\natO{\mu}{a}$}            (t a);
        \draw [->] (tt a2) to node [swap] {$\natO{\mu}{a}$}            (t a);
      \end{tikzpicture}
    \end{center}
    \caption{Monadic associativity.}
    \label{fig:monad-associativity}
  \end{figure}

  \begin{figure}[htb]
    \begin{center}
      \begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=4cm]
        \node (it a)                 {$\funcO{I}(\funcO{T}(a))$};
        \node (tt a) [right of=it a] {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a))$};
        \node (ti a) [right of=tt a] {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{I}(a))$};
        \node (t a1) [below of=it a] {$\funcO{T}(a)$};
        \node (t a2) [right of=t a1] {$\funcO{T}(a)$};
        \node (t a3) [right of=t a2] {$\funcO{T}(a)$};

        \draw [->] (it a) to node        {$\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)}$} (tt a);
        \draw [->] (ti a) to node [swap] {$\funcM{T}(\natO{\eta}{a})$} (tt a);

        \draw [double] (it a) to                        (t a1);
        \draw [->]     (tt a) to node {$\natO{\mu}{a}$} (t a2);
        \draw [double] (ti a) to                        (t a3);

        \draw [->] (t a1) to node [swap] {$\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$} (t a2);
        \draw [->] (t a3) to node        {$\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$} (t a2);
      \end{tikzpicture}
    \end{center}
    \caption{Monadic unity.}
    \label{fig:monad-unity}
  \end{figure}

  \begin{figure}[htb]
    \begin{center}
      \begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=4cm]
        \node (f a)                {$a$};
        \node (f b) [below of=f a] {$\funcO{T}(b)$};
        \node (g a) [right of=f a] {$\funcO{T}(a)$};
        \node (g b) [below of=g a] {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))$};

        \draw [->] (f a) to node [swap] {$f$}            (f b);
        \draw [->] (g a) to node        {$\funcM{T}(f)$} (g b);

        \draw [->] (f a) to node        {$\natO{\eta}{a}$}            (g a);
        \draw [->] (f b) to node [swap] {$\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)}$} (g b);
      \end{tikzpicture}
    \end{center}
    \caption{Naturality of the \nat{\eta} natural transformation.}
    \label{fig:monad-naturality-unit}
  \end{figure}

  \begin{figure}[htb]
    \begin{center}
      \begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=4cm]
        \node (f a)                {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a))$};
        \node (f b) [below of=f a] {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b)))$};
        \node (g a) [right of=f a] {$\funcO{T}(a)$};
        \node (g b) [below of=g a] {$\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))$};

        \draw [->] (f a) to node [swap] {$\funcM{T}(\funcM{T}(f))$} (f b);
        \draw [->] (g a) to node        {$\funcM{T}(f)$}            (g b);

        \draw [->] (f a) to node        {$\natO{\mu}{a}$}            (g a);
        \draw [->] (f b) to node [swap] {$\natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(b)}$} (g b);
      \end{tikzpicture}
    \end{center}
    \caption{Naturality of the \nat{\mu} natural transformation.}
    \label{fig:monad-naturality-multiplication}
  \end{figure}

\end{definition}

\begin{remark}
  \label{re:monad-monoid}

  Formally, the definition of a monad is like that of a monoid as
  described in Example \ref{ex:category-monoid}. Let $\mon{T} =
  (\func{T}, \nat{\eta}, \nat{\mu})$ be a monad in a category
  $\cat{C}$. The endofunctor $\func{T}$ is the set of elements of a
  monoid $M = (\func{T}, \nat{\eta}, \nat{\mu})$. The multiplication
  natural transformation, $\nat{\eta}$, is the associative binary
  operation of the monoid, and it has an identity, the unit natural
  transformation, $\nat{\mu}$. Thus, the diagram in Figure
  \ref{fig:monad-associativity} is the associative law for the monad,
  while the diagram in Figure \ref{fig:monad-unity} expresses the left
  and right unit laws \parencite[138]{maclane-1998}.

\end{remark}

As examples of monads, we consider the identity monad, which is just a
reformulation of the identity functor for a given category.

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:monad-identity}

  Let $\cat{C}$ be a category. The identity or trivial monad of
  $\cat{C}$ is $\mon{I} = (\func{I}, \id, \id)$, that is, the identity
  endofunctor (see Example \ref{ex:functor-identity}) and the identity
  mapping of $\cat{C}$. Equations \eqref{eq:monad-associativity},
  \eqref{eq:monad-unity-left}, and \eqref{eq:monad-unity-right} hold
  by \eqref{eq:category-identity}, and
  \eqref{eq:monad-naturality-unit} and
  \eqref{eq:monad-naturality-multiplication} hold because \nat{\id} is
  a natural transformation (see Example \ref{ex:natural-identity}).

\end{example}

\subsection*{Kleisli triples}

Now, we describe Kleisli triples, which ``are just an alternative
description for monads'' \parencite[60]{moggi-1991}.

\begin{definition}
  \label{def:triple}

  %% \parencite[58]{moggi-1991}

  Let $\cat{C}$ be a category. A Kleisli triple $\mon{T} = (\funcO{T},
  \nat{\eta}, \monM{T}{\underscore})$ in $\cat{C}$, where $\nat{\eta}$
  is a transformation \eqref{eq:monad-unit}, assigns to each object
  $a$ an object $\funcO{T}(a)$, and to each morphism $f: a \to
  \funcO{T}(b)$ a morphism $\monM{T}{f}: \funcO{T}(a) \to
  \funcO{T}(b)$, such that, for all morphisms $f: a \to \funcO{T}(b)$
  and $g: b \to \funcO{T}(c)$,
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:triple-associativity}
    \monM{T}{g} \comp \monM{T}{f} = \monM{T}{(\monM{T}{g} \comp f)}
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  for all morphisms $f: a \to \funcO{T}(b)$,
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:triple-unity-left}
    \monM{T}{f} \comp \natO{\eta}{a} = f
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  and, for all objects $a$,
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:triple-unity-right}
    \monM{T}{\natO{\eta}{a}} = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  that is, the diagrams in Figures \ref{fig:triple-associativity} and
  \ref{fig:triple-unity} are commutative, and
  \eqref{eq:triple-unity-right}.

  \begin{figure}[htb]
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.45\linewidth}
      \begin{center}
        \begin{tikzpicture}
          \node (t a)                {$\funcO{T}(a)$};
          \node (t b) [right of=t a] {$\funcO{T}(b)$};
          \node (t c) [below of=t b] {$\funcO{T}(c)$};

          \draw [->] (t a) to node        {$\monM{}{f}$}                    (t b);
          \draw [->] (t a) to node [swap] {$\monM{}{(\monM{}{g} \comp f)}$} (t c);
          \draw [->] (t b) to node        {$\monM{}{g}$}                    (t c);
        \end{tikzpicture}
      \end{center}
      \caption{Kleisli triple associativity.}
      \label{fig:triple-associativity}
    \end{subfigure}
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.45\linewidth}
      \begin{center}
        \begin{tikzpicture}
          \node (a)                  {$a$};
          \node (t a) [right of=a]   {$\funcO{T}(a)$};
          \node (t b) [below of=t a] {$\funcO{T}(b)$};

          \draw [->] (a)   to node        {$\natO{\eta}{a}$} (t a);
          \draw [->] (a)   to node [swap] {$f$}              (t b);
          \draw [->] (t a) to node        {$\monM{}{f}$}     (t b);
        \end{tikzpicture}
      \end{center}
      \caption{Kleisli triple unity.}
      \label{fig:triple-unity}
    \end{subfigure}
    \caption{}
  \end{figure}

\end{definition}

\begin{remark}
  \label{re:triple}

  From a computational perspective, ``$\natO{\eta}{a}$ is the
  inclusion of values into computations and $\monM{T}{f}$ is the
  extension of a function $f$ from values to computations to a
  function from computations to computations, which first evaluates a
  computation and then applies $f$ to the resulting value''
  \parencite[59]{moggi-1991}.

\end{remark}

\begin{remark}
  \label{re:monad-triple}

  Unlike the definition of a monad, a Kleisli triple does not require
  an endofunctor, just an object mapping, and its unit is not required
  to be defined as a natural transformation, just a transformation.

\end{remark}

As examples, we describe the identity or trivial monad as a Kleisli
triple.

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:triple-identity}

  Let $\cat{C}$ be a category. The identity or trivial Kleisli triple
  of $\cat{C}$ is $\mon{I} = (\funcO{I}, \id, \funcM{I})$, that is,
  the object mapping of the identity endofunctor (see Example
  \ref{ex:functor-identity}), the identity mapping, and the morphism
  mapping of the identity endofunctor of $\cat{C}$. Equation
  \eqref{eq:triple-associativity} holds by
  \eqref{eq:category-associativity}, and \eqref{eq:triple-unity-left}
  and \eqref{eq:triple-unity-right} hold by
  \eqref{eq:category-identity}. This is just an alternative
  description of the identity monad (see Example
  \ref{ex:monad-identity}).

\end{example}

\subsection*{Monads $=$ Kleisli triples}

Algebraic theories in clone form \parencite[24]{manes-1976}, which we
shall refer to as monads in clone form, are yet another alternative
description for monads. \textcite[26--29]{manes-1976} thoroughly
proved the equivalence between monads and monads in clone form, and
\textcite[61]{moggi-1991} stated the equivalence between monads and
Kleisli triples, and proved it without going into details. The
following theorems demonstrate in a thorough manner that monads and
Kleisli triples are equivalent. As illustrated in Figure
\ref{fig:monad-theory-triple}, these proofs are enough for stating the
equivalence between the three alternative descriptions.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzpicture}
      \node (monad)                         {Monad};
      \node (theory) [below left of=monad]  {Monad in clone form};
      \node (triple) [below right of=monad] {Kleisli triple};

      \draw [<->] (monad) to (theory);
      \draw [<->] (monad) to (triple);
    \end{tikzpicture}
  \end{center}
  \caption{Monads $=$ Monads in clone form $=$ Kleisli triples.}
  \label{fig:monad-theory-triple}
\end{figure}

First, we state that a Kleisli triple can be obtained from a monad.
Since monads are defined in terms of functors and natural
transformations, the following lemma is simpler than its converse.

\begin{lemma}
  \label{lem:monad-to-triple}

  %% \parencite[61]{moggi-1991}

  Let $\mon{T} = (\func{T}, \nat{\eta}, \nat{\mu})$ be a monad in a
  category $\cat{C}$. Then
  \begin{equation*}
    \mon{T} = (\funcO{T}, \nat{\eta}, \monM{}{\underscore})
    \text{,}
  \end{equation*}
  where $\funcO{T}$ is the object mapping of the endofunctor
  $\func{T}$, $\nat{\eta}$ is the underlying transformation of the
  natural transformation $\nat{\eta}$, and $\monM{}{\underscore}$
  assigns to each morphism $f : a \to \funcO{T}(b)$ a morphism
  $\monM{}{f}: \funcO{T}(a) \to \funcO{T}(b)$ defined by
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:monad-to-triple-extension}
    \monM{}{f} = \natO{\mu}{b} \comp \funcM{T}(f)
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  is a Kleisli triple in $\cat{C}$.

  \begin{proof}

    First, we prove that \eqref{eq:triple-associativity} holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\monM{}{g} \comp \monM{}{f}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-to-triple-extension} with $f = f$ and $f = g$}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{c} \comp \funcM{T}(g) \comp \natO{\mu}{b} \comp \funcM{T}(f)}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-naturality-multiplication} with $f = g$}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{c} \comp \natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(c)} \comp \funcM{T}(\funcM{T}(g)) \comp \funcM{T}(f)}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:functor-composition} with $g = \funcM{T}(g)$}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{c} \comp \natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(c)} \comp \funcM{T}(\funcM{T}(g) \comp f)}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-associativity} with $a = c$}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{c} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\mu}{c}) \comp \funcM{T}(\funcM{T}(g) \comp f)}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:functor-composition} with $f = \funcM{T}(g) \comp f$ and $g = \natO{\mu}{c}$}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{c} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\mu}{c} \comp \funcM{T}(g) \comp f)}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-to-triple-extension} with $f = g$ and $f = \monM{}{g} \comp f$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{g} \comp f)}}
    \end{steps}
    Now, we prove that \eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\monM{}{f} \comp \natO{\eta}{a}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-to-triple-extension}}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{b} \comp \funcM{T}(f) \comp \natO{\eta}{a}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-naturality-unit}}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{b} \comp \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-unity-left} with $a = b$}
      \stepm{\idO{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:category-identity}}
      \stepm{f}
    \end{steps}
    Finally, we prove that \eqref{eq:triple-unity-right} holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\natO{\eta}{a}}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-to-triple-extension} with $f = \natO{\eta}{a}$}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{a} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\eta}{a})}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:monad-unity-right}}
      \stepm{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}
    \end{steps}

  \end{proof}

\end{lemma}

The object mapping of a Kleisli triple can be extended to define an
endofunctor, as proven in the following lemma.

\begin{proposition}
  \label{prop:triple-to-endofunctor}

  %% \parencite[61]{moggi-1991}

  Let $\cat{C}$ be a category. If $\mon{T} = (\funcO{T}, \nat{\eta},
  \monM{}{\underscore})$ is a Kleisli triple in $\cat{C}$, then
  $\func{T} = (\funcO{T}, \funcM{T})$, which assigns to each morphism
  $f: a \to b$ a morphism $\funcM{T}(f): \funcO{T}(a) \to
  \funcO{T}(b)$ defined by
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function}
    \funcM{T}(f) = \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{b} \comp f)}
    \text{,}
  \end{equation}
  is an endofunctor in $\cat{C}$.

  \begin{proof}

    In the first place, we prove that \eqref{eq:functor-identity}
    holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\funcM{T}(\idO{a})}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function} with $f = \idO{a}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{a} \comp \idO{a})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:category-identity} with $f = \natO{\eta}{a}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\natO{\eta}{a}}}
    \end{steps}
    In the second place, we prove that \eqref{eq:functor-composition}
    holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\funcM{T}(g \comp f)}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function} with $f = g \comp f$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{c} \comp g \comp f)}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} with $f = \natO{\eta}{c} \comp g$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{c} \comp g)} \comp \natO{\eta}{b} \comp f)}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-associativity} with $f = \natO{\eta}{b} \comp f$ and $g = \natO{\eta}{c} \comp g$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{c} \comp g)} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{b} \comp f)}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function} with $f = f$ and $f = g$}
      \stepm{\funcM{T}(g) \comp \funcM{T}(f)}
    \end{steps}

  \end{proof}

\end{proposition}

Now, since $\func{T}$ is an endofunctor, we state and prove that
$\nat{\eta}$ is a natural transformation.

\begin{proposition}
  \label{prop:triple-to-monad-unit}

  If $\mon{T} = (\funcO{T}, \nat{\eta}, \monM{}{\underscore})$ is a
  Kleisli triple in a category $\cat{C}$, then the transformation
  $\nat{\eta}$ is natural.

  \begin{proof}

    We prove that \eqref{eq:naturality} holds for $\nat{\eta}$:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} with $f = \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)} \comp \natO{\eta}{a}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function}}
      \stepm{\funcM{T}(f) \comp \natO{\eta}{a}}
    \end{steps}

  \end{proof}

\end{proposition}

Next, we define the multiplication of a monad given a Kleisli triple,
and prove that it is a natural transformation.

\begin{proposition}
  \label{prop:triple-to-monad-multiplication}

  %% \parencite[61]{moggi-1991}

  Let $\cat{C}$ be a category. If $\mon{T} = (\funcO{T}, \nat{\eta},
  \monM{}{\underscore})$ is a Kleisli triple in $\cat{C}$, then a
  transformation $\nat{\mu}$ which assigns to each object $a$ a
  morphism $\natO{\mu}{a}: \funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a)) \to \funcO{T}(a)$
  defined by
  \begin{equation}
    \label{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication}
    \natO{\mu}{a} = \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}
  \end{equation}
  is a natural transformation $\nat{\mu}: \func{T} \comp \func{T} \to
  \func{T}: \cat{C} \to \cat{C}$.

  \begin{proof}

    We prove that \eqref{eq:naturality} holds for $\nat{\mu}$:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp \funcM{T}(\funcM{T}(f))}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication} with $a = \funcO{T}(b)$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))}} \comp \funcM{T}(\funcM{T}(f))}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function}}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))}} \comp \funcM{T}(\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)})}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function} with $f = \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))}} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-associativity} with $f = \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)}$ and $g = \idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))}} \comp \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} with $f = \idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(b))} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:category-identity} with $f = \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:category-identity} with $f = \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)} \comp \idO{\funcO{T}(a)})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-associativity} with $f = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$ and $g = \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(b)} \comp f)} \comp \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function}}
      \stepm{\funcM{T}(f) \comp \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication}}
      \stepm{\funcM{T}(f) \comp \natO{\mu}{a}}
    \end{steps}

  \end{proof}

\end{proposition}

Now, we state that a monad can be obtained from a Kleisli triple using
the constructions from the three lemmas above.

\begin{lemma}
  \label{lem:triple-to-monad}

  Let $\mon{T} = (\funcO{T}, \nat{\eta}, \monM{}{\underscore})$ be a
  Kleisli triple in a category $\cat{C}$. Then
  \begin{equation*}
    \mon{T} = (\func{T}, \nat{\eta}, \nat{\mu})
    \text{,}
  \end{equation*}
  where $\func{T}$ is the endofunctor in $\cat{C}$ defined by Lemma
  \ref{prop:triple-to-endofunctor}, $\nat{\eta}$ is the transformation
  \nat{\eta} regarded as a natural transformation (see Lemma
  \ref{prop:triple-to-monad-unit}), and $\nat{\mu}: \func{T} \comp
  \func{T} \to \func{T}: \cat{C} \to \cat{C}$ is the natural
  transformation defined by Lemma
  \ref{prop:triple-to-monad-multiplication}, is a monad in $\cat{C}$.

  \begin{proof}

    First, we prove that \eqref{eq:monad-associativity} holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{a} \comp \natO{\mu}{\funcO{T}(a)}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication} with $a = a$ and $a = \funcO{T}(a)$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a))}}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-associativity} with $f = \idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a))}$ and $g = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \idO{\funcO{T}(\funcO{T}(a))})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:category-identity} with $f = \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:category-identity} with $f = \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\idO{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} with $f = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-associativity} with $f = \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}$ and $g = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication}}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{a} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \natO{\mu}{a})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function} with $f = \natO{\mu}{a}$}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{a} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\mu}{a})}
    \end{steps}
    Now, we prove that \eqref{eq:monad-unity-left} holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{a} \comp \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication}}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} with $f = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$}
      \stepm{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}
    \end{steps}
    Finally, we prove that \eqref{eq:monad-unity-right} holds:
    \begin{steps}
      \stepm{\natO{\mu}{a} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\eta}{a})}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication}}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \funcM{T}(\natO{\eta}{a})}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function} with $f = \natO{\eta}{a}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \monM{}{(\natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \natO{\eta}{a})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-associativity} with $f = \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \natO{\eta}{a}$ and $g = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\monM{}{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}} \comp \natO{\eta}{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \natO{\eta}{a})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} with $f = \idO{\funcO{T}(a)}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{(\idO{\funcO{T}(a)} \comp \natO{\eta}{a})}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:category-identity} with $f = \natO{\eta}{a}$}
      \stepm{\monM{}{\natO{\eta}{a}}}
        \eqby{\eqref{eq:triple-unity-right}}
      \stepm{\idO{\funcO{T}(a)}}
    \end{steps}

  \end{proof}

\end{lemma}

Finally, in the following theorem, we prove that monads and Kleisli
triples are equivalent.

\begin{theorem}
  \label{the:monad-triple}

  Monads and Kleisli triples are coextensive.

  \begin{proof}

    The correspondence between monads and Kleisli triples is given by
    Lemma \ref{lem:monad-to-triple}, which proves that a Kleisli
    triple can be derived from a monad, and Lemma
    \ref{lem:triple-to-monad}, which proves that a monad can be
    derived from a Kleisli triple.

  \end{proof}

\end{theorem}

\section{Monads and Kleisli triples in Haskell}
\label{sec:monads-haskell}

When discussing monads, there are three possibilities: monads (in
monoid form), Kleisli triples or monads in extension form, and monads
in clone form. Kleisli triples are easier to justify from a
computational point of view and correspond to the representation that
is found in functional programming languages like Haskell and Agda. On
the other hand, monads have some mathematical advantages and are more
intuitive in some cases. In this section, we describe both
representations in Haskell.

\subsection*{Monads}

In \hask, a monad consists of an endofunctor, together with two
parametrically polymorphic functions, as follows\footnote{Note that
  this is not a standard type class.}:
\begin{codehaskell}
class Functor m => Monad' m where
  return :: a -> m a
  join   :: m (m a) -> m a
\end{codehaskell}
The endofunctor \texthaskell{m} corresponds to the endofunctor
$\func{T}$ of a monad, and the \texthaskell{return} and
\texthaskell{join} functions correspond to the unit and multiplication
natural transformations of a monad, $\nat{\eta}$ and $\nat{\mu}$,
respectively.

in such a way that, for
all types \texthaskell{a} $\in \catO{\hask}$, the diagrams in Figures
\ref{fig:monad-associativity-haskell} and
\ref{fig:monad-unity-haskell} are commutative, or, equivalently,
\begin{codehaskell}
join . join = join . fmap join
\end{codehaskell}
\begin{codehaskell}
join . return = id
\end{codehaskell}
and
\begin{codehaskell}
join . fmap return = id
\end{codehaskell}
which correspond to \eqref{eq:monad-associativity},
\eqref{eq:monad-unity-left}, and \eqref{eq:monad-unity-right},
respectively.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=4cm]
      \node (ttt a)                  {\texthaskell{m (m (m a))}};
      \node (tt a1) [right of=ttt a] {\texthaskell{m (m a)}};
      \node (tt a2) [below of=ttt a] {\texthaskell{m (m a)}};
      \node (t a)   [right of=tt a2] {\texthaskell{m a}};

      \draw [->] (ttt a) to node        {\texthaskell{fmap join}} (tt a1);
      \draw [->] (ttt a) to node [swap] {\texthaskell{join}}      (tt a2);
      \draw [->] (tt a1) to node        {\texthaskell{join}}      (t a);
      \draw [->] (tt a2) to node [swap] {\texthaskell{join}}      (t a);
    \end{tikzpicture}
  \end{center}
  \caption{Monadic associativity in \hask.}
  \label{fig:monad-associativity-haskell}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=4cm]
      \node (it a)                 {\texthaskell{m a}};
      \node (tt a) [right of=it a] {\texthaskell{m (m a)}};
      \node (ti a) [right of=tt a] {\texthaskell{m a}};
      \node (t a2) [right of=t a1] {\texthaskell{m a}};


      \draw [->] (it a) to node        {\texthaskell{return}}      (tt a);
      \draw [->] (ti a) to node [swap] {\texthaskell{fmap return}} (tt a);

      \draw [->]     (tt a) to node {\texthaskell{join}} (t a2);

      \draw [->] (it a) to node [swap] {\texthaskell{id}} (t a2);
      \draw [->] (ti a) to node        {\texthaskell{id}} (t a2);
    \end{tikzpicture}
  \end{center}
  \caption{Monadic unity in \hask.}
  \label{fig:monad-unity-haskell}
\end{figure}

Additionally, since \texthaskell{return}
and \texthaskell{join}
are parametrically polymorphic
functions, then, by parametricity (see Section
\ref{sec:naturals-haskell}), for all functions
\begin{codehaskell}
f :: a -> m b
\end{codehaskell}
\begin{codehaskell}
return . f = fmap f . return
\end{codehaskell}
and
\begin{codehaskell}
join . fmap (fmap f) = fmap f . join
\end{codehaskell}
which correspond to \eqref{eq:monad-naturality-unit} and
\eqref{eq:monad-naturality-multiplication}, respectively.

Monads in \hask are defined by the \texthaskell{Monad'} type class,
whose declaration appears below and which is not a standard type
class. As usual, notice that monadic associativity and unity, and
monadic naturalities, are not part of this declaration. As mentioned
earlier, however, the latter need not be part of it because they are
free theorems.

As examples, we consider \todo{Introduce the following examples
  (identity, maybe, list).}

As examples, we consider the identity or trivial monad, and two of the
most common monads in Haskell, Maybe and the list monad.

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:monad-identity-haskell}

  Unlike Examples \ref{ex:monad-identity} and
  \ref{ex:triple-identity}, the identity monad in \hask is an
  intuitive way of learning to use the \texthaskell{Monad'} type
  class. It is just a redefinition of the identity functor (see
  Example \ref{ex:functor-identity-haskell}), but its instance
  declaration, which appears below, gives a good idea of what
  \texthaskell{return} and \texthaskell{join} do.


  \begin{codehaskell}
instance Monad' Identity where
  return :: a -> Identity a
  return = Identity

  join :: Identity (Identity a) -> Identity a
  join (Identity mx) = mx
  \end{codehaskell}

  \todo{Using the InstanceSigs language option}

  Proof...

\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:monad-maybe-haskell}

  The \texthaskell{Maybe} monad in \hask consists of the
  \texthaskell{Maybe} endofunctor (Example
  \ref{ex:functor-maybe-haskell})... The \texthaskell{Monad'} instance
  declaration for the \texthaskell{Maybe} type is shown below.
  \begin{codehaskell}
instance Monad' Maybe where
  return :: a -> Maybe a
  return = Just

  join :: Maybe (Maybe a) -> Maybe a
  join Nothing   = Nothing
  join (Just mx) = mx
  \end{codehaskell}
  First, we prove that \eqref{eq:monad-associativity} holds:

  \vspace{1em}
  \caseh{Nothing}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . join) Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{join (join Nothing)}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{join Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{fmap}
    \steph{join (fmap join Nothing)}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{(join . fmap join) Nothing}
  \end{steps}
  \caseh{(Just mmx)}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . join) (Just mmx)}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{join (join (Just mmx))}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{join mmx}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{join (Just (join mmx))}
      \eqbydefh{fmap}
    \steph{join (fmap join (Just mmx))}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{(join . fmap join) (Just mmx)}
  \end{steps}
  We prove that \eqref{eq:monad-unity-left} holds:
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . return) mx}
      \eqbydef{\texthaskell{(.)}}
    \steph{join (return mx)}
      \eqbydef{\texthaskell{return}}
    \steph{join (Just mx)}
      \eqbydef{\texthaskell{join}}
    \steph{mx}
      \eqbydef{\texthaskell{id}}
    \steph{id mx}
  \end{steps}
  Finally, we prove that \eqref{eq:monad-unity-right} holds:

  \vspace{1em}
  \caseh{Nothing}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . fmap return) Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{join (fmap return Nothing)}
      \eqbydefh{fmap}
    \steph{join Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{id}
    \steph{id Nothing}
  \end{steps}
  \caseh{(Just x)}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . fmap return) (Just x)}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{join (fmap return (Just x))}
      \eqbydefh{fmap}
    \steph{join (Just (return x))}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{return x}
      \eqbydefh{return}
    \steph{Just x}
      \eqbydefh{id}
    \steph{id (Just x)}
  \end{steps}

\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:monad-list-haskell}

  In \hask, the list monad in \hask consists of the list endofunctor
  (Example \ref{ex:functor-list-haskell}). The instance declaration
  for lists is as follows:
  \begin{codehaskell}
instance Monad' [] where
  return :: a -> [a]
  return x = [x]

  join :: [[a]] -> [a]
  join = concat
  \end{codehaskell}

  \begin{codehaskell}
concat :: [[a]] -> [a]
concat []       = []
concat (xs:xss) = xs ++ concat xss
  \end{codehaskell}
  and
  \begin{codehaskell}
(++) :: [a] -> [a] -> [a]
[]     ++ ys = ys
(x:xs) ++ ys = x : xs ++ ys
  \end{codehaskell}

  We prove, by induction, that \eqref{eq:monad-associativity} holds:

  \vspace{1em}
  \caseh{[]}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . join) []}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{(concat . concat) []}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{concat (concat [])}
      \eqbydefh{concat}
    \steph{concat []}
      \eqbydefh{fmap}
    \steph{concat (fmap concat [])}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{(concat . fmap concat) []}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{(join . fmap join) []}
  \end{steps}
  \caseh{(xss:xsss)}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . join) (xss:xsss)}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{(concat . concat) (xss:xsss)}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{concat (concat (xss:xsss))}
      \eqbydefh{concat}
    \steph{concat (xss ++ concat xsss)}
      \eqbydefh{}
    \steph{concat xss ++ concat (concat xsss)}
      \eqbyih
    \steph{concat xss ++ concat (fmap concat xsss)}
      \eqbydefh{}
    \steph{concat (concat xss : fmap concat xsss)}
      \eqbydefh{fmap}
    \steph{concat (fmap concat (xss:xsss))}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{(concat . fmap concat) (xss:xsss)}
      \eqbydefh{join}
    \steph{(join . fmap join) (xss:xsss)}
  \end{steps}
  Now, we prove that \eqref{eq:monad-unity-left} holds:
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . return) xs}

    \steph{(concat . return) xs}

    \steph{concat (return xs)}

    \steph{concat [xs]}

    \steph{xs}
      \eqbydefh{id}
    \steph{id xs}
  \end{steps}
  Finally, we prove, by induction, that \eqref{eq:monad-unity-right}
  holds:

  \vspace{1em}
  \caseh{[]}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . fmap return) []}

    \steph{concat (fmap return [])}
      \eqbydefh{fmap}
    \steph{concat []}
      \eqbydefh{concat}
    \steph{[]}
      \eqbydefh{id}
    \steph{id []}
  \end{steps}
  \caseh{(x:xs)}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(join . fmap return) (x:xs)}

    \steph{concat (fmap return (x:xs))}

    \steph{concat (return x : fmap return xs)}

    \steph{return x ++ concat (fmap return xs)}
      \eqbyih
    \steph{return x ++ id xs}

    \steph{[x] ++ xs}
      \eqbydefh{(++)}
    \steph{(x:xs)}
      \eqbydefh{id}
    \steph{id (x:xs)}
  \end{steps}

\end{example}

\subsection*{Kleisli triples}

\todo{\texthaskell{bind} is actually \texthaskell{=<<}.}

Similary, a Kleisli triple in \hask consists of a type constructor
\texthaskell{m}, which corresponds to the object mapping, a
parametrically polymorphic function \texthaskell{return}, which corresponds to
\eqref{eq:monad-unit}, and a function
\begin{codehaskell}
(>>=) :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
\end{codehaskell}
or, better,
\begin{codehaskell}
bind :: (a -> m b) -> m a -> m b
\end{codehaskell}
which corresponds to the extension, such that, for all functions
\begin{equation*}
  \text{\texthaskell{f :: a -> m b}}
  \quad
  \text{and}
  \quad
  \text{\texthaskell{g :: b -> m c}}
  \text{,}
\end{equation*}
\begin{codehaskell}
bind g . bind f = bind (bind g . f)
\end{codehaskell}
for all functions \texthaskell{f :: a -> m b},
\begin{codehaskell}
bind f . return = f
\end{codehaskell}
and
\begin{codehaskell}
bind return = id
\end{codehaskell}
which correspond to \eqref{eq:triple-associativity},
\eqref{eq:triple-unity-left}, and \eqref{eq:triple-unity-right},
respectively, or, equivalently, such that the diagrams in Figures
\ref{fig:triple-associativity-haskell} and
\ref{fig:triple-unity-haskell} are commutative, and right unity.

\begin{figure}[htb]
  \begin{center}
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.45\linewidth}
      \begin{center}
        \begin{tikzpicture}
          \node (t a)                {\texthaskell{m a}};
          \node (t b) [right of=t a] {\texthaskell{m b}};
          \node (t c) [below of=t b] {\texthaskell{m c}};

          \draw [->] (t a) to node        {\texthaskell{bind f}}            (t b);
          \draw [->] (t a) to node [swap] {\texthaskell{bind (bind g . f)}} (t c);
          \draw [->] (t b) to node        {\texthaskell{bind g}}            (t c);
        \end{tikzpicture}
      \end{center}
      \caption{Monadic associativity.}
      \label{fig:triple-associativity-haskell}
    \end{subfigure}
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.45\linewidth}
      \begin{center}
        \begin{tikzpicture}
          \node (a)                  {\texthaskell{a}};
          \node (t a) [right of=a]   {\texthaskell{m a}};
          \node (t b) [below of=t a] {\texthaskell{m b}};

          \draw [->] (a)   to node        {\texthaskell{return}} (t a);
          \draw [->] (a)   to node [swap] {\texthaskell{f}}      (t b);
          \draw [->] (t a) to node        {\texthaskell{bind f}} (t b);
        \end{tikzpicture}
      \end{center}
      \caption{Monadic unity.}
      \label{fig:triple-unity-haskell}
    \end{subfigure}
  \end{center}
  \caption{}
\end{figure}

Section \ref{sec:functors-haskell} details the correspondence between
an object function such as To and a type constructor.
An important, and inevitable, difference between Definition
\ref{def:triple} and Kleisli triples in Haskell is that the former would not
require \texthaskell{return} to be a natural transformation, but it is
(by parametricity, all parametrically polymorphic functions are
natural transformations). Finally, the type signature of the
\texthaskell{bind} function could be rewritten as
\begin{equation*}
  \text{\texthaskell{bind :: (a -> m b) -> (m a -> m b)}}
  \text{,}
\end{equation*}
which makes it clear that it assigns a function to another function.

\todo{Specify the correspondence with the standard type class.}

Kleisli triples in \hask are defined by the \texthaskell{Monad} type
class, which corresponds to the minimal definition of the standard
\texthaskell{Monad} type class and whose declaration appears below.
Notice that, as usual, this declaration does not include the laws.
\begin{codehaskell}
class Monad m where
  return :: a -> m a
  bind   :: (a -> m b) -> m a -> m b
\end{codehaskell}

The standard \texthaskell{Monad} type class is defined in terms of
\texthaskell{(>>=)}, as below. Note that only the minimal definition
is presented, that is, \texthaskell{(>>)} and \texthaskell{fail} are
not included. This declaration is equivalent to that above, but the
latter is more suitable for abstract manipulation and for comparing
monads with Kleisli triples.
\begin{codehaskell}
class Monad m where
  return :: a -> m a
  (>>=)  :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
\end{codehaskell}

\begin{remark}
  \label{re:triple-endofunctor}

  Note that not including a \texthaskell{Functor} type constraint to
  the \texthaskell{Triple} type class is actually more theoretically
  correct. However, since Lemma \ref{prop:triple-to-endofunctor}
  states that Kleisli triples are endofunctors, this type constraint
  could be included for practical reasons.

  For instance, it is preferable to use \texthaskell{fmap} instead of
  \texthaskell{liftM}. \todo{Find a better argument or ignore this.}

\end{remark}

\begin{codehaskell}
(>>=) :: Monad m => m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
mx >>= f = bind f mx
\end{codehaskell}


Since
\begin{steps}
  \steph{(bind g . bind f) mx}
    \eqbydefh{(.)}
  \steph{bind g (bind f mx)}
    \eqbydefh{bind}
  \steph{(bind f mx) >>= g}
    \eqbydefh{bind}
  \steph{(mx >>= f) >>= g}
\end{steps}
and
\begin{steps}
  \steph{bind (bind g . f) mx}
    \eqbydefh{bind}
  \steph{mx >>= (bind g . f)}
    \eqbydefh{(.)}
  \steph{mx >>= (\textbackslash x -> bind g (f x))}
    \eqbydefh{bind}
  \steph{mx >>= (\textbackslash x -> f x >>= g)}
\end{steps}
\begin{steps}
  \steph{(bind f . return) x}
    \eqbydefh{(.)}
  \steph{bind f (return x)}
    \eqbydefh{bind}
  \steph{return x >>= f}
\end{steps}
and
\begin{steps}
  \steph{bind return mx}
    \eqbydefh{(>>=)}
  \steph{mx >>= return}
\end{steps}
right, left unit, and associativity become
\begin{codehaskell}
mx >>= return = mx
\end{codehaskell}
\begin{codehaskell}
return x >>= f = f x
\end{codehaskell}
and
\begin{codehaskell}
(mx >>= f) >>= g = mx >>= (\textbackslash x -> f x >>= g)
\end{codehaskell}
respectively, which are the standard laws.

\todo{These laws in terms of \texthaskell{>>=} are rather weird to
  understand. This could be easier with yet another way of expressing
  monads and Kleisli triples: algebraic theories in clone form and the
  operator \texthaskell{<=<}.}

\todo{Introduce the following examples (identity, maybe, list).}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:triple-identity-haskell}

  Since the \texthaskell{Monad} type class does not include a
  \texthaskell{Functor} type constraint, the identity Kleisli triple
  (when compared with the identity monad of Example
  \ref{ex:monad-identity-haskell}) is a better way of showing that the
  identity monad is just a redefinition of the identity functor. Its
  instance declaration is:
  \begin{codehaskell}
instance Monad Identity where
  return :: a -> Identity a
  return = Identity

  bind :: (a -> Identity b) -> Identity a -> Identity b
  bind f (Identity x) = f x
  \end{codehaskell}

  Proof...

\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:triple-maybe-haskell}

  The \texthaskell{Maybe} type constructor, together with a unit
  function
  \begin{equation*}
    \text{\texthaskell{return :: a -> Maybe a}}
  \end{equation*}
  defined by..., and a multiplication function
  \begin{equation*}
    \text{\texthaskell{bind :: (a -> Maybe b) -> Maybe a -> Maybe b}}
  \end{equation*}
  yield the \texthaskell{Maybe} Kleisli triple in \hask. Its instance
  declaration is:

  \begin{codehaskell}
instance Monad Maybe where
  return :: a -> Maybe a
  return = Just

  bind :: (a -> Maybe b) -> Maybe a -> Maybe b
  bind _ Nothing  = Nothing
  bind f (Just x) = f x
  \end{codehaskell}

  We prove that \eqref{eq:triple-associativity} holds:

  \vspace{1em}
  \caseh{Nothing}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{bind return Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{bind}
    \steph{Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{id}
    \steph{id Nothing}
  \end{steps}
  \caseh{(Just x)}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{bind return (Just x)}
      \eqbydefh{return}
    \steph{return x}
      \eqbydefh{return}
    \steph{Just x}
      \eqbydefh{id}
    \steph{id (Just x)}
  \end{steps}
  We prove that \eqref{eq:triple-unity-left} holds:
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(bind f . return) x}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{bind f (return x)}
      \eqbydefh{return}
    \steph{bind f (Just x)}
      \eqbydefh{bind}
    \steph{f x}
  \end{steps}
  Finally, we prove that \eqref{eq:triple-unity-right} holds:

  \vspace{1em}
  \caseh{Nothing}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(bind g . bind f) Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{bind g (bind f Nothing)}
      \eqbydefh{bind}
    \steph{bind g Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{bind}
    \steph{Nothing}
      \eqbydefh{bind}
    \steph{bind (bind g . f) Nothing}
  \end{steps}
  \caseh{(Just x)}
  \begin{steps}
    \steph{(bind g . bind f) (Just x)}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{bind g (bind f (Just x))}
      \eqbydefh{bind}
    \steph{bind g (f x)}
      \eqbydefh{(.)}
    \steph{(bind g . f) x}
      \eqbydefh{bind}
    \steph{bind (bind g . f) (Just x)}
  \end{steps}

\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:triple-list-haskell}

  The list Kleisli triple in \hask consists of the list type
  constructor, that is, \texthaskell{[]}, a unit function
  \begin{equation*}
    \text{\texthaskell{return :: a -> [a]}}
  \end{equation*}
  defined by... and an extension function
  \begin{equation*}
    \text{\texthaskell{bind :: (a -> [b]) -> [a] -> [b]}}
  \end{equation*}
  The instance declaration for the list type constructor is:
  \begin{codehaskell}
instance Monad [] where
  return :: a -> [a]
  return x = [x]

  bind :: (a -> [b]) -> [a] -> [b]
  bind f xs = concat (map f xs)
  \end{codehaskell}

  Proof...

\end{example}

\subsection*{Monads $=$ Kleisli triples}

Lemma \ref{lem:monad-to-triple}

\begin{codehaskell}
(>>=) :: Monad m => m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
mx >>= f = join (fmap f mx)
\end{codehaskell}

\begin{codehaskell}
bind :: Monad m => (a -> m b) -> m a -> m b
bind f mx = join (fmap f mx)
\end{codehaskell}
This is just \eqref{eq:monad-to-triple-extension}.

Proposition \ref{prop:triple-to-endofunctor}
\begin{codehaskell}
fmap :: Triple m => (a -> b) -> m a -> m b
fmap f mx = mx >>= (return . f)
\end{codehaskell}
This is just \eqref{eq:triple-to-endofunctor-morphism-function}, or
the standard \texthaskell{liftM} function.

Proposition \ref{prop:triple-to-monad-unit} proves that
\texthaskell{return} is a natural transformation. However, this is not
really necessary because of parametricity.

Proposition \ref{prop:triple-to-monad-multiplication}
\begin{codehaskell}
join :: Triple m => m (m a) -> m a
join mmx = mmx >>= id
\end{codehaskell}
This is just \eqref{eq:triple-to-monad-multiplication}.

Sd, Lemma \ref{lem:triple-to-monad}.

In conclusion, by Theorem \ref{the:monad-triple}, monads and Kleisli triples
in Haskell are equivalent.

\todo{In semigroupoids, Edward Kmett defines bindable functors (that
  is, monads without \texthaskell{return}). The type class
  \texthaskell{Bind} includes both \texthaskell{bind} and
  \texthaskell{join}. Thus, yet another alternative type class
  declaration would look like:}
\begin{codehaskell}
class Functor m => Monad'' m where
  return :: a -> m a

  bind :: (a -> m b) -> m a -> m b
  bind f = join . fmap f

  join :: m (m a) -> m a
  join = bind id
\end{codehaskell}

\section{Monads and Kleisli triples in Agda}
\label{sec:monads-agda}

...


\subsection*{Monads}

Module \module{Abel.Category.Monad}.

\begin{codeagda}
record Monad' {M : Set → Set} (functor : Functor M) : Set₁ where

  constructor mkMonad'

  open Functor functor using (fmap)

  field

    return : {A : Set} → A → M A

    join   : {A : Set} → M (M A) → M A

    associativity : {A : Set} (mmmx : M (M (M A))) →
                    join (join mmmx) ≡ join (fmap join mmmx)

    unity-left    : {A : Set} (mx : M A) → join (return mx) ≡ mx

    unity-right   : {A : Set} (mx : M A) → join (fmap return mx) ≡ mx

    naturality-return : {A B : Set} {f : A → M B} (x : A) →
                        return (f x) ≡ fmap f (return x)

    naturality-join   : {A B : Set} {f : A → M B} (mmx : M (M A)) →
                        join (fmap (fmap f) mmx) ≡ fmap f (join mmx)

  bind : {A B : Set} → (A → M B) → M A → M B
  bind f = join ∘ fmap f
\end{codeagda}

\todo{Introduce the following examples.} Compare the following example
with Examples \ref{ex:monad-identity} and
\ref{ex:monad-identity-haskell}.

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:monad-identity-agda}

  The identity monad in Agda (which corresponds to the identity monad
  in \hask as presented in Example \ref{ex:monad-identity-haskell}) is
  defined and proved to be a monad in the module
  \module{Abel.Data.Identity.Monad}.
  \begin{codeagda}
monad' : Monad' functor
monad' = mkMonad' return join associativity unity-left unity-right
                  naturality-return naturality-join
  where
    return : {A : Set} → A → Identity A
    return = identity

    join : {A : Set} → Identity (Identity A) → Identity A
    join (identity x) = x

    open Functor functor using (fmap)

    associativity : {A : Set} (x : Identity (Identity (Identity A))) →
                    join (join x) ≡ join (fmap join x)
    associativity (identity _) = refl

    unity-left : {A : Set} (x : Identity A) → join (return x) ≡ x
    unity-left _ = refl

    unity-right : {A : Set} (x : Identity A) → join (fmap return x) ≡ x
    unity-right (identity _) = refl

    naturality-return : {A B : Set} {f : A → Identity B} (x : A) →
                        return (f x) ≡ fmap f (return x)
    naturality-return _ = refl

    naturality-join : {A B : Set} {f : A → Identity B}
                      (x : Identity (Identity A)) →
                      join (fmap (fmap f) x) ≡ fmap f (join x)
    naturality-join (identity _) = refl
  \end{codeagda}

\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:monad-maybe-agda}

  The \textagda{Maybe} monad in Agda corresponds to Example
  \ref{ex:monad-maybe-haskell} and can be found in module
  \module{Abel.Data.Maybe.Monad}.
  \begin{codeagda}
monad' : Monad' functor
monad' = mkMonad' return join associativity unity-left unity-right
                  naturality-return naturality-join
  where
    return : {A : Set} → A → Maybe A
    return = just

    join : {A : Set} → Maybe (Maybe A) → Maybe A
    join (just mx) = mx
    join nothing   = nothing

    open Functor functor

    associativity : {A : Set} (mmmx : Maybe (Maybe (Maybe A))) →
                    join (join mmmx) ≡ join (fmap join mmmx)
    associativity (just _) = refl
    associativity nothing  = refl

    unity-left : {A : Set} (mx : Maybe A) → join (return mx) ≡ mx
    unity-left _ = refl

    unity-right : {A : Set} (mx : Maybe A) → join (fmap return mx) ≡ mx
    unity-right (just _) = refl
    unity-right nothing  = refl

    naturality-return : {A B : Set} {f : A → Maybe B} (x : A) →
                        return (f x) ≡ fmap f (return x)
    naturality-return _ = refl

    naturality-join : {A B : Set} {f : A → Maybe B} (mmx : Maybe (Maybe A)) →
                      join (fmap (fmap f) mmx) ≡ fmap f (join mmx)
    naturality-join (just _) = refl
    naturality-join nothing  = refl
  \end{codeagda}

\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:monad-list-agda}

  The \textagda{List} monad (which can be found in Abel's module
  \module{Abel.Data.List.Monad}), corresponds to Example
  \ref{ex:monad-list-haskell}. Note that its proof is not as
  straightforward as those of the identity and the Maybe monads.
  \begin{codeagda}
monad' : Monad' functor
monad' = mkMonad' return join associativity unity-left unity-right
                  naturality-return naturality-join
  where
    return : {A : Set} → A → List A
    return x = x ∷ []

    join : {A : Set} → List (List A) → List A
    join = concat

    open Functor functor using (fmap)

    associativity : {A : Set} (xsss : List (List (List A))) →
                    join (join xsss) ≡ join (fmap join xsss)
    associativity []                        = refl
    associativity ([] ∷ xsss)               = associativity xsss
    associativity (([] ∷ xss) ∷ xsss)       = associativity (xss ∷ xsss)
    associativity (((x ∷ xs) ∷ xss) ∷ xsss) =
      cong (_∷_ x) (associativity ((xs ∷ xss) ∷ xsss))

    unity-left : {A : Set} (xs : List A) → join (return xs) ≡ xs
    unity-left []       = refl
    unity-left (x ∷ xs) = cong (_∷_ x) (unity-left xs)

    unity-right : {A : Set} (xs : List A) → join (fmap return xs) ≡ xs
    unity-right []       = refl
    unity-right (x ∷ xs) = cong (_∷_ x) (unity-right xs)

    naturality-return : {A B : Set} {f : A → List B} (x : A) →
                        return (f x) ≡ fmap f (return x)
    naturality-return _ = refl

    naturality-join : {A B : Set} {f : A → List B} (xss : List (List A)) →
                      join (fmap (fmap f) xss) ≡ fmap f (join xss)
    naturality-join         []               = refl
    naturality-join         ([] ∷ xss)       = naturality-join xss
    naturality-join {f = f} ((x ∷ xs) ∷ xss) =
      cong (_∷_ (f x)) (naturality-join (xs ∷ xss))
  \end{codeagda}

\end{example}

\subsection*{Kleisli triples}

The module \module{Abel.Category.Monad} also defines Kleisli triples
or monads in extension form in Agda. The following definition
corresponds to the type class declaration of Kleisli triples in
Haskell. As usual, this definition includes the monadic laws and
naturalities, which means that any instance of the \textagda{Monad}
type class \emph{is} a monad.

\begin{codeagda}
record Monad (M : Set → Set) : Set₁ where

  constructor mkMonad

  field

    return : {A : Set} → A → M A

    bind   : {A B : Set} → (A → M B) → M A → M B

    associativity : {A B C : Set} {f : A → M B} {g : B → M C} (mx : M A) →
                    bind g (bind f mx) ≡ bind (bind g ∘ f) mx

    unity-left    : {A B : Set} {f : A → M B} (x : A) →
                    bind f (return x) ≡ f x

    unity-right   : {A : Set} (mx : M A) → bind return mx ≡ mx

  infixr 1 _=<<_

  _=<<_ : {A B : Set} → (A → M B) → M A → M B
  _=<<_ = bind

  infixl 1 _>>=_ _>>_

  _>>=_ : {A B : Set} → M A → (A → M B) → M B
  mx >>= f = bind f mx

  _>>_ : {A B : Set} → M A → M B → M B
  mx >> my = mx >>= λ _ → my

  fmap : {A B : Set} → (A → B) → M A → M B
  fmap f = bind (return ∘ f)

  join : ∀ {A} → M (M A) → M A
  join = bind id
\end{codeagda}

As with Kleisli triples in Haskell, we choose to use the
\textagda{bind} function instead of the \textagda{\_>>=\_} operator
because the former is easier to use for abstract manipulation.
However, the latter is included in the definition of a Kleisli triple,
as well as the \textagda{\_=<<\_} operator, which corresponds exactly
to the \textagda{bind} function.

The following example should be compared with Examples
\ref{ex:triple-identity} and \ref{ex:triple-identity-haskell}.
\todo{Introduce all three examples.}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:triple-id-agda}
  The identity Kleisli triple in Agda, which corresponds to Examples
  \ref{ex:triple-identity} and \ref{ex:triple-identity-haskell},
  appears in module \module{Abel.Data.Identity.Monad}.

  \begin{codeagda}
monad : Monad Identity
monad = mkMonad return bind associativity unity-left unity-right
  where
    return : {A : Set} → A → Identity A
    return = identity

    bind : {A B : Set} → (A → Identity B) → Identity A → Identity B
    bind f (identity x) = f x

    associativity : {A B C : Set} {f : A → Identity B} {g : B → Identity C}
                    (x : Identity A) → bind g (bind f x) ≡ bind (bind g ∘ f) x
    associativity (identity _) = refl

    unity-left : {A B : Set} {f : A → Identity B} (x : A) →
                 bind f (return x) ≡ f x
    unity-left _ = refl

    unity-right : {A : Set} (x : Identity A) → bind return x ≡ x
    unity-right (identity _) = refl
  \end{codeagda}
\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:triple-maybe-agda}

  The \textagda{Maybe} Kleisli triple in Agda corresponds to the
  \texthaskell{Maybe} Kleisli triple in Haskell (Example
  \ref{ex:triple-maybe-haskell}). Its definition and proof can be found in module
  \module{Abel.Data.Maybe.Monad}. Note that this instance includes a
  proof of the fact that the \textagda{Maybe} type constructor is
  indeed a Kleisli triple.

  \begin{codeagda}
monad : Monad Maybe
monad = mkMonad return bind associativity unity-left unity-right
  where
    return : {A : Set} → A → Maybe A
    return = just

    bind : {A B : Set} → (A → Maybe B) → Maybe A → Maybe B
    bind f (just x) = f x
    bind _ nothing  = nothing

    associativity : {A B C : Set} {f : A → Maybe B} {g : B → Maybe C}
                    (mx : Maybe A) → bind g (bind f mx) ≡ bind (bind g ∘ f) mx
    associativity (just _) = refl
    associativity nothing  = refl

    unity-left : {A B : Set} {f : A → Maybe B} (x : A) →
                 bind f (return x) ≡ f x
    unity-left _ = refl

    unity-right : {A : Set} (mx : Maybe A) → bind return mx ≡ mx
    unity-right (just _) = refl
    unity-right nothing  = refl
  \end{codeagda}

\end{example}

\begin{example}
  \label{ex:triple-list-agda}

  Finally, the \textagda{List} Kleisli triple in Agda corresponds to
  Example \ref{ex:triple-list-haskell}. Just like with Example
  \ref{ex:monad-list-agda}, note that its proof is not as
  straightforward as those of the previous Kleisli triples. Its
  definition can be found in module \module{Abel.Data.List.Monad}.

  \begin{codeagda}
monad : Monad List
monad = mkMonad return bind associativity unity-left unity-right
  where
    return : {A : Set} → A → List A
    return x = x ∷ []

    bind : {A B : Set} → (A → List B) → List A → List B
    bind f xs = concat (map f xs)

    associativity : {A B C : Set} {f : A → List B} {g : B → List C}
                    (xs : List A) → bind g (bind f xs) ≡ bind (bind g ∘ f) xs
    associativity             []       = refl
    associativity {f = f} {g} (x ∷ xs) =
      begin
        concat (map g (f x ++ concat (map f xs)))
          ≡⟨ cong concat (map-++-commute g (f x) (concat (map f xs))) ⟩
        concat (map g (f x) ++ map g (concat (map f xs)))
          ≡⟨ concat-++-commute (map g (f x)) (map g (concat (map f xs))) ⟩
        concat (map g (f x)) ++ concat (map g (concat (map f xs)))
          ≡⟨ cong (_++_ (concat (map g (f x)))) (associativity xs) ⟩
        concat (map g (f x)) ++ concat (map (bind g ∘ f) xs)
      ∎
        where open Relation.Binary.PropositionalEquality.≡-Reasoning

    unity-left : {A B : Set} {f : A → List B} (x : A) →
                 bind f (return x) ≡ f x
    unity-left {f = f} x = ++-[] (f x)

    unity-right : {A : Set} (xs : List A) → bind return xs ≡ xs
    unity-right []       = refl
    unity-right (x ∷ xs) = cong (_∷_ x) (unity-right xs)
  \end{codeagda}

\end{example}

\subsection*{Monads $=$ Kleisli triples}

...

\section{References}
\label{sec:monads-references}

The definitions of monad and Kleisli triple are based on
\parencite[137]{maclane-1998} and \parencite[58]{moggi-1991},
respectively, and the theorems of the correspondence between monads
and Kleisli triples are based on \parencites[24,
  26--29]{manes-1976}[61]{moggi-1991}.

\begin{terminology}
  \label{ter:monads}

  Although the common term for monads is monad, alternatives include
  standard construction, which is the original term
  \parencite[30]{manes-1976}, algebraic theory in monoid form
  \parencite[29]{manes-1976}, and triple
  \parencites[83]{barr-2005}[372]{barr-wells-2012}. The common term
  for Kleisli triples is Kleisli triple, but another term is algebraic
  theory in extension form \parencite[32]{manes-1976}, which is
  perhaps more precise but rather outdated. We choose the common terms
  for the sake of simplicity and for effectively distinguishing
  between monads and Kleisli triples.

\end{terminology}

\clearemptydoublepage
